---
authors:
- Samuel Braza
categories: null
date: "2021-06-23T22:52:56+08:00"
description: null
draft: false
featuredImage: null
lastmod: "2021-06-23T22:52:56+08:00"
series: null
tags: null
title: The Immorality of Promoting Unheld Ideas
toc: true
---

Although it may be ludicrous to do so, in this essay I will first briefly discuss the value of truth in order to motivate some later claims. It seems prima facie true that truth itself is vastly important. People strive for the truth at all times, in all sorts of ways. Philosophers often aim to get at basic truths of the world, whether moral, epistemic, or metaphysical. Scientists aim through empiric means, at figuring out all sorts of natural truths. Everyone wants to know the truth, seemingly out of some innate desire for it. Further, truth has obvious pragmatic benefits. If I do not have a true belief about where the supermarket is, I will likely have issues when trying to buy eggs. If someone holds that smoking decreases the risk of lung cancer, he may face serious health consequences. There are infinite examples of truth’s pragmatic benefits, and it should also be uncontroversial to conclude that humans fervently desire the truth. Clearly it has great value to us.

Since the truth has tremendous pragmatic value, it appears that to deny someone the truth is to deny that person something which they could use to make the right decisions. Even when the truth does not have much use, it is still something humans almost universally desire. It may not help the average person to know that the white shape we see in the sky at night is essentially a giant rock orbiting our planet, and yet that average person would want to know what the moon is. Many would hold that lying is immoral, in part because to lie is to conceal some sort of truth. In lying one might harm the recipient of the lie. By withholding the truth one is denying another some desirable information about the world (note that this is far from an exhaustive discussion on the problems with dishonesty).

Considering the apparent immorality of lying and the importance we ascribe to knowledge, I wonder about the ethics of certain practices that occur in philosophical education. Often philosophy students are given an assignment to write a paper defending a particular viewpoint, where they cannot choose the perspective from which they write. Other times, students are given the option to choose which stance they might defend of a particular viewpoint. In those cases, though, students (and I speak from experience, having taken many philosophy classes in which I discussed assignments with my peers) will choose the side for which they can more easily generate an argument, or the side which will better help them meet the word limit for. Some students even pick at random the side which they will defend, and then dedicate themselves to proving that side true. I find this practice morally questionable, despite having engaged in it myself in the past.

For example, student might write an excellent paper defending property dualism, evolutionary skepticism, animalism, or any other position in some branch of philosophy. Her professor might find himself influenced by this paper. I suppose this scenario is rather far-fetched, since the papers of students 1) rarely bring up novel ideas 2) are often poorly written and contain obvious errors in thought, and 3) are read by instructors who have already formed opinions on the subject, but even so the situation is *possible*. Given that, is it not a student’s duty, when writing a paper, to dedicate herself to discovering what seems to be the truth and defending the position that best corresponds to that truth? Otherwise, she might run the (slight) risk of convincing her teacher of a position that might very well be wrong. Given the capabilities of most philosophy professors, they are likely to see through poor reasoning or justification, but it is still possible that a student might present what appears to be a persuasive, rational, and well-justified argument for an incorrect position. This problem is exacerbated in the classroom when students must serve as peer-reviewers for each other. A fellow student, much less experienced than their professor, is rather more likely to be persuaded by an unsound argument, and would thus inherit an incorrect belief. Since I believe we should be in the practice of promoting truth, I find this possibility rather worrying.

It should be obvious that I would also take issue with those who promote through more public channels views which they themselves do not hold. Philosophers who publish papers merely to be published or be cited, but do not actually believe their arguments, are committing, I think, a grave epistemic sin. By publishing arguments that try to establish beliefs they do not agree with, they spread their ideas to a wider audience, and thus potentially harm the epistemic standing of many others. Granted, I do not know how wide a practice this is in academic philosophy, but I assume it does happen on occasion.

However, one might extoll the benefits of the “devil’s advocate,” the person promoting an opposition viewpoint in order to ensure that the more-accepted view is properly justified. It is thought that this sort of opposition in discussion is important to ensure objections are considered and that one does not obstinately cling to ill-founded beliefs. I do not dispute that; however, I believe there are some issues in raising an objection thoughtlessly. While it is important to consider the ways in which an argument might be flawed, one should only bring up those points which they truly see to be weak. If the original argument is in fact correct, and the objection is only brought up out of a sense of duty or even a contradictory spirit (and is in fact not actually believed by the objector), it might end up confusing those involved in the exchange of ideas. It might influence them to incorrectly switch sides, or at least adapt an incorrect position when they had previously taken a more neutral, undecided stance. Thus, I hold that those who raise opposing views they do not believe in order to contradict one view, are in a way true epistemic devils themselves.

It is worth qualifying this view of mine, though. If one is unsure about a particular debate or question, yet has some insights they believe are useful for that question, it is not harmful for them to bring them up. To present a theory or a novel argument is not in my view unethical. That theory might very well be correct, and even if it is not, the author would only be bringing up the idea in earnest. As long as he believes that argument to be reasonable and possibly true, it is not dishonest. Students and professional philosophers alike should feel free to suggest ideas they are entertaining. Otherwise, only those who are most certain would be able to speak. We should strive for honesty, though, and only defend ideas we find possible or likely to be true.

Of course, one might argue that belief in a position does not entail truth. A student might advance a view they do not believe, but is in fact true. In that case, would they not be bringing some sort of benefit, by promoting a true proposition? Perhaps, but as fallible thinkers we can only put forward our best position, which should be the one we ourselves hold to be true. While a philosopher may be wrong on any given topic, given sufficient cognitive ability and knowledge, he should be able to generate ideas with at least some solid chance of being true. If I have greater evidence to support *p* than I have to support *q*, I must accept *p*, and it would be an error to accept *q* instead. Further, though I will not spend more time establishing it here, I believe that lying is unethical in most instances, and to advance a position one does not believe is a form of lying, and so it follows that such intellectual behavior is unethical.
